{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf290
{\fonttbl\f0\fmodern\fcharset0 Courier;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;\f2\fmodern\fcharset0 Courier-Bold;
\f3\fmodern\fcharset0 Courier-Oblique;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{square\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'01\uc0\u9642 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}}
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\fi560\sl288\slmult1\sb160\qj\pardirnatural

\f0\fs26 \cf0 Profiles are basically alignments of a family protein. The main advantage of such profiles, is that they take into account the variability of amino-acids usage at a given position. Psiblast, a flavor of the blast package, can take advantage of the information a profile holds, by building a PSSM (Position Specific Scoring Matrix) and using it instead of the regular substitution matrices. Two methods were used to build the profiles used in for this work.\
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\li720\fi-720\sl288\slmult1\sb160\qj\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9642 
\f0 	}
\f2\b Generic profiles
\f0\b0  : For each family reported in \{Zhang and Gladyshev, 2008, PLoS Genet, 4, e1000095\}, we used starting alignments (called \'93seed profiles\'94 afterwards) from the databases in which the candidates were found. Those databases were either Pfam \{Finn et al., 2010, Nucleic Acids Res, 38, D211\}, COG \{Tatusov et al., 2000, Nucleic Acids Res, 28, 33\}, CDD \{Marchler-Bauer et al., 2009, Nucleic Acids Res, 37, D205\}. Although those starting alignments are curated, they have two major drawbacks : the number of  sequences in the alignment varies from a few to several thousand, and it is not guarantied that annotated selenoproteins are part of these profiles. In order to overcome these two drawbacks, the profiles were \'93extended\'94 by running psiblast against nr with the parameters [-F F -b 5000 -I -d nr -j 4] using the seed profiles as a query, and fetching the full length sequences from the blast database. The sequences were then aligned using 
\f3\i mafft
\f0\i0  with default parameters [--auto]. Because the alignments obtained often contained too many sequences for the subsequent steps, they were \'93trimmed\'94 by using the software 
\f3\i trimAl
\f0\i0  \{Capella-Gutierrez et al., 2009, Bioinformatics, btp348v1\} with the parameter [-clusters n] (n = 200). Trimming the alignments in such a way allows to reduce the size of the alignments while keeping its \'93reprentativeness\'94. The alignment is then realigned with T-Coffee \{Notredame et al., 2000, J Mol Biol, 302, 205-17\} with defaults parameters [-output=fasta]. Finally, the information 
\f3\i selenoprofiles
\f0\i0  needs was generated \'96 mainly building a PSSM and tagging suitable sequences in the profile as potential queries (<< SELENOPROFILES STEPS >>) \'96 from the profiles by 
\f3\i prepare_alignment_selenoprofiles.py
\f0\i0 , a script included in the 
\f3\i selenoprofiles
\f0\i0  package, with the parameters [-all -tag_threshold n] (0 < n < 1 depending on the quality of the alignment). As specified in << TABLE >>, putative positions could not always be found because some families were new and did not contain any annotated Sec homologues. In those cases, the putative position of the Sec residue was inserted manually by adding to the profile an artificial sequence composed of the sequence best fitting the profile and a manually inserted U at the position described in \{Zhang et al., 2005, Genome Biol, 6, R37\} or \{Zhang and Gladyshev, 2008, PLoS Genet, 4, e1000095\}. In cases were multiple putative Sec residues positions were possible, separate profiles were built. Having very similar profiles with different Sec residue positions is not a problem since the redundancy of the results is dealt with in further steps. \
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9642 
\f0 	}
\f2\b Prokaryote specific profiles :
\f0\b0  The set of families for which profiles are built are in fact the same as the generic ones. Several profiles from other selenoprotein containing potential families which are known to be present in prokaryotes only were built (<< TABLE >>). The profiles were built by using a single sequence likely to be representative enough of the given family among prokaryotes as a blast query with parameters [-p blastp -I -F F -d nr]. The database against which the search was made is a custom database derived from NR (non-redundant) and containing sequences of which the GI accession number was associated to a taxid equal to 2 (\'93bacteria\'94 superkingdom according to NCBI Taxonomy). The full sequences are then fetched from the NR database, and an alignment is computed. The number of hits obtained from the blast step were already limited, so no trimming was necessary. Because the blast step was performed only on one kingdom (bacteria) and the number of hits was smaller than in the blast step from the generic profile, only a few profiles contained at least one selenoprotein. For those profiles which did not contain selenoproteins, the same manual insertion of Sec residues as in the generic profiles was performed.}