{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf290
{\fonttbl\f0\fmodern\fcharset0 Courier;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\fi560\sl288\slmult1\sb160\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\fs26 \cf0 Selenoproteins are present in the three domains of life. Selenium is incorporated in these proteins as selenocysteine, which is considered the 21st amino-acid. Yet, many species, among bacteria, archaea and eukaryote seem to lack selenoproteins. Selenocysteine is encoded by the UGA codon, normally required for the termination of the translation. In order to synthesize selenoproteins, bacteria, archaea and eukaryotes use a rather conserved machinery. The production and incorporation of selenocysteine in selenoproteins in made in a co-translational manner, thanks to trans- and cys-acting elements. The main cys-acting element is the SElenoCysteine Insertion Sequence (SECIS), present downstream of the UGA codon in bacteria and in the 3'UTR in archaea and eukaryotes. The key enzymes involved in this process are a selenocysteine synthase, a specific elongation factor, a specific tRNA, and a selenophosphate synthetase. Other factor are required in archaea and eukaryotes such as a SECIS binding protein.\
In this project, we propose to investigate with bioinformatic methods the characteristic features of the selenoproteomes and the selenium processing machinery of numerous species in the three domains of life. By analyzing bacterial, archaeal, and eukaryal specific traits, we hope to find remains of bacterial selenoproteome and machinery in archaea, as well as bacterial and archaeal selenoproteome and machinery in protists.}